Enable debug malloc for end users. (#3653)
openenclave/openenclave: samples/debugmalloc/README.md

# The debug malloc sample

- Introduction about debug malloc.
- Demonstrate how to enable debug malloc through compiling options.

> - explanation and sample of debug malloc public apis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Explanation and sample of debug malloc public APIs.
```

## Introduction

Debug malloc is a tool that helps identifying memory leaks in enclaves. The
main logic of debug malloc is as follows.

- Whenever memory is allocated, debug malloc captures the callstack and
associates it with the allocated memory. Additionally, debug malloc sets the
contents of the allocated memory to zero.

> - Whenever memory is freed, it clears the contents to a fixed pattern to help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Whenever memory is freed, all bytes are set to 0x0D to help
```
Explain to the developer what the fixed pattern is, since they will need to be able to recognize it in debugging

detect access of freed memory. It also frees the associated callstack
information.

- When an enclave terminates, debug malloc prints information about leaks---
those objects that have been allocated, but not freed.

> According to the user's developing experience, there are two major problems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two major problems
```

(We don't refer to a "developer" as a "user", a user is who runs the programs the developer develops.  However here this phrase isn't important and can simply be omitted without loss of meaning.)

> which the memory leaking detection can help to address:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which memory leak detection can help to address:
```

- A developer wants to track all memory allocations throughout the execution of an enclave
  and to determine if any of these allocations were leaked.

>   We name it "global detection".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We call this "global detection".
```

Reviewer: Also add text explaining whether this sample illustrates global detection or local detection or both.

- A developer wants to track memory allocations in a specific part of the enclave's

>   execution that he or she can specify at the source code level. We name it "local detection".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  execution that he or she can specify at the source code level. We call this "local detection".
```

## Global detection

> Debug malloc is shipped to the users as a separate library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debug malloc is available as a separate library
```

oelibdebugmalloc.a, then there are two options to enable the global detection.

### Global default option

The "USE_DEBUG_MALLOC" define controls the global default. It is set to "ON" in

> debug mode by default. Users can modify this default option according to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
debug mode by default. You can modify this default option according to the
```

need, such as changing it to "ON" in release mode or changing it to "OFF" in
debug mode.

Please note that this option only works if you are building OE from source
code that this option is only valid in the OE project and not exported.
Additional, as a global option it will add the "-loedebugmalloc" option to all
the enclave targets in the OE project. If you are not building OE from source
or just want to apply this library to specific enclaves, please check the next
"custom option".

### Custom option

> Since oelibdebugmalloc.a is a separate library, users can turn on debug malloc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since oelibdebugmalloc.a is a separate library, you can turn on debug malloc
```

per enclave while the default option is "OFF".

> To use debug malloc, users will have to link oelibdebugmalloc.a into their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use debug malloc, link oelibdebugmalloc.a into your
```

enclaves explicitly. This can be done by
```
      cmake:
      target_link_libraries(enclave openenclave::oedebugmalloc
              openenclave::oeenclave openenclave::oelibc)

      make:
      LDFLAGS=$(shell pkg-config oeenclave-$(COMPILER) --libs)
      LDFLAGS_CUSTOM=$(subst -loelibc, -loedebugmalloc -loelibc, $(LDFLAGS))
      $(CC) -o debugmallocenc debugmalloc_t.o enc.o $(LDFLAGS_CUSTOM)

```

Please note that oedebugmalloc must be specified in the linker line before

> `oelibcxx`, `oelibc` and `oecore` libraries to make sure the related funtions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `oelibcxx`, `oelibc` and `oecore` libraries to make sure the related functions
```

are loaded from oedebugmalloc.

> 

Reviewer: Since the report API is only mentioned under Local Detection, how is a report generated with global detection?  Does OE SDK somehow do it automatically?  Is it internally invoked as part of oe_terminate_enclave()?   How can the user control where the report is output (stdout or some file or whatever else)?

Reviewer 2: Update readme file to say what happens for global detecttion.

Author: Yes the global detection is enabled by default if the enclave is linked against oedebugmalloc:
https://github.com/nonpolarity/openenclave/blob/5ca957a2dc17379f90ffca2db3c2a9153d517d72/enclave/core/sgx/calls.c#L417.
it is invoked as part of enclave termination, and the report destination is stdout.

Reviewer: README.md needs to be updated to say so

Author: Updated, thanks!

## Local detection

The following APIs are provided in the header file `debugmalloc.h`.

- `oe_result_t oe_debug_malloc_tracking_start(void)`

>   Starts tracking allocations that will be displayed in report. Subsequent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Starts tracking allocations that will be displayed in a tracking report. Subsequent
```
(clarification to avoid confusion with an SGX Report for attestation)

  calls to start without a preceding stop will be ignored and return value is
  "OE_UNEXPECTED".

- `oe_result_t oe_debug_malloc_tracking_stop(void)`

>   Stops tracking allocations that will be displayed in report. Multiple calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Stops tracking allocations that will be displayed in a tracking report. Multiple calls
```

the calling sequence following this rule, the return values are OE_OK. Return
value "OE_UNEXPECTED" means the sequence is not expected.

Regardless the execution and output of these state switching functions,
oe_debug_malloc_tracking_report() covers all the leaks happened during the
tracking state cumulatively.

```
      stop()  |--------------|  start() |--------------|  start()
   |--------->|              |--------->|              |----------|
   |          | not tracking |          |   tracking   |          |
   |----------|              |<---------|              |<---------|
              |--------------|  stop()  |--------------|
```

- oe_debug_malloc_tracking_start() and oe_debug_malloc_tracking_stop() can be
called many times:

```
  |----code1--|-----------|----code2--|--|----code3--|
  start1->stop1->report1->start2->stop2->start3->stop3->report3
```

In this case report1 only covers code1, and report3 covers code1, code2 and
code3.

Please also note that these public APIs only affect the result of local
detection. The result of global detection is independent of these APIs. While
the calling of these APIs follow the rules, the result of local detection is

> supposed to be the subset of result of global detection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
supposed to be the subset of the result of global detection.
```

## Example
```c
#include <openenclave/corelibc/stdlib.h>
#include <openenclave/debugmalloc.h>
#include <stdio.h>

// Include the trusted debugmalloc header that is generated
// during the build. This file is generated by calling the
// sdk tool oeedger8r against the debugmalloc.edl file.
#include "debugmalloc_t.h"

// This is the function that the host calls. It prints
// a message in the enclave before calling back out to
// the host to print a message from there too.
void enclave_hello()
{
    void *buf1, *buf2, *buf3;

>     uint64_t num;

Reviewer: See comments in the actual sample.  The same changes are needed here.

Reviewer 2: num -> count
buf->buffer

Author: Updated, thanks!

    char* report;

    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_start() == OE_OK);
    buf1 = oe_malloc(4096);
    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_stop() == OE_OK);
    if (oe_debug_malloc_tracking_report(&num, &report) == OE_OK)
    {
        printf("There are %d un-freed objects reported:\n%s\n", num, report);
        oe_free(report);
    }

    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_start() == OE_OK);
    buf2 = oe_malloc(4096);
    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_stop() == OE_OK);

    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_start() == OE_OK);
    buf3 = oe_malloc(4096);
    oe_assert(oe_debug_malloc_tracking_stop() == OE_OK);
    if (oe_debug_malloc_tracking_report(&num, &report) == OE_OK)
    {
        printf("There are %d un-freed objects reported:\n%s\n", num, report);
        oe_free(report);
    }

    oe_free(buf1);
    oe_free(buf2);

>     oe_free(buf3);

Reviewer: This doesn't match what the sample does which has omits this free

Author: Updated, thanks!

report respectively:
```
There are 1 un-freed objects reported:
oe_debug_malloc(): 7efc950f1f90
oe_malloc(): 7efc950f3463
enclave_hello(): 7efc9501804d
ecall_enclave_hello(): 7efc95003762
oe_handle_call_enclave_function(): 7efc95126cd9
_handle_ecall(): 7efc95128bae
__oe_handle_main(): 7efc951284ef
oe_enter(): 7efc95129e6c

There are 3 un-freed objects reported:
oe_debug_malloc(): 7efc950f1f90
oe_malloc(): 7efc950f3463
enclave_hello(): 7efc950183d6
ecall_enclave_hello(): 7efc95003762
oe_handle_call_enclave_function(): 7efc95126cd9
_handle_ecall(): 7efc95128bae
__oe_handle_main(): 7efc951284ef
oe_enter(): 7efc95129e6c

oe_debug_malloc(): 7efc950f1f90
oe_malloc(): 7efc950f3463
enclave_hello(): 7efc95018265
ecall_enclave_hello(): 7efc95003762
oe_handle_call_enclave_function(): 7efc95126cd9
_handle_ecall(): 7efc95128bae
__oe_handle_main(): 7efc951284ef
oe_enter(): 7efc95129e6c

oe_debug_malloc(): 7efc950f1f90
oe_malloc(): 7efc950f3463
enclave_hello(): 7efc9501804d
ecall_enclave_hello(): 7efc95003762
oe_handle_call_enclave_function(): 7efc95126cd9
_handle_ecall(): 7efc95128bae
__oe_handle_main(): 7efc951284ef
oe_enter(): 7efc95129e6c

```

> For the global detection, Since this sample has no memory leak at the point of

Reviewer 3: It would be good to demonstrate detection as well.
- The host can allocate the same enclave again.
- The host makes an ecall that allocates some memory, but does not free it
- Host calls oe_terminate on the enclave which will now return OE_LEAK

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I update the doc to let users to try it out.

- The thread-safe concern is confined to local detection only. Debug malloc
does not require thread-aware allocators to behave differently to work with
debug malloc. The global detection is thread-safe and accurate.

- Since debug malloc is a wrapper around the memory allocator, it is fully
composable with a pluggable OE allocator, and it does not require any change to
the OE allocators for the new features. Also, the underlying allocator
execution on independent threads will not affect the result of debug malloc.

## Build and run

Open Enclave SDK supports building the sample on both Linux and Windows.
Linux supports two types of build systems, GNU Make with `pkg-config` and CMake,
while Windows supports only CMake.

### Linux

### Source the openenclaverc file

Information on this can be found in [Sourcing the openenclaverc file](../BuildSamplesLinux.md#source-the-openenclaverc-file)

#### CMake

This uses the CMake package provided by the Open Enclave SDK.

```bash
cd debugmalloc
mkdir build && cd build
cmake ..
make run
```

#### GNU Make

```bash
cd debugmalloc
make build
make run
```

### Windows

> ### Set up the environemt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Set up the environment
```

Information on this can be found in [Steps to build and run samples](../BuildSamplesWindows.md#steps-to-build-and-run-samples)

#### CMake

```cmd
mkdir build && cd build
cmake .. -G Ninja -DNUGET_PACKAGE_PATH=C:\oe_prereqs
ninja
ninja run
```

#### Note

> debugmalloc sample can run under OE simulation mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The debugmalloc sample can run under OE simulation mode.
```

Please note that this option only works if you are building OE from source
code that this option is only valid in the OE project and not exported.
Additional, as a global option it will add the "-loedebugmalloc" option to all
the enclave targets in the OE project. If you are not building OE from source
or just want to apply this library to specific enclaves, please check the next
"custom option".

### Custom option

Since oelibdebugmalloc.a is a separate library, you can turn on debug malloc
per enclave while the default option is "OFF".

To use debug malloc, link oelibdebugmalloc.a into your
enclaves explicitly. This can be done by
```
      cmake:
      target_link_libraries(enclave openenclave::oedebugmalloc
              openenclave::oeenclave openenclave::oelibc)

      make:
      LDFLAGS=$(shell pkg-config oeenclave-$(COMPILER) --libs)
      LDFLAGS_CUSTOM=$(subst -loelibc, -loedebugmalloc -loelibc, $(LDFLAGS))
      $(CC) -o debugmallocenc debugmalloc_t.o enc.o $(LDFLAGS_CUSTOM)

```

Please note that oedebugmalloc must be specified in the linker line before
`oelibcxx`, `oelibc` and `oecore` libraries to make sure the related functions
are loaded from oedebugmalloc.

> Through the global default option or custom option, enclave can be linked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through the global default option or the custom option, an enclave can be linked
```

against oedebugmalloc and the global detection is enabled automatically. If

> there is any memory leaks since enclave creation, during the enclave

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are any memory leaks since enclave creation, during the enclave
```

> termination all the leaks will be printed to the stdout. Pleas check the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
termination all the leaks will be printed to the stdout. Please check the
```
